What if I told you there was nothing to be scared of?
I'm going to show you what I'm going to show you.
We have this culture in TV, no matter how modern and progressive we get,
no matter how sensitive and gentle we become, underneath it all, all of the men and women.
I think we pride ourselves on an almost militaristic mindset.
We're doing something so important here that requires so much discipline and hierarchy and collaboration and intuitiveness.
It simultaneously dehumanizes the people you work with while making them the most important people in the world.
I don't know if it's just my narcissism or if this is a common thing that people experience with grief,
but I just hear that someone is gone and then I'm immediately parsing it.
What is wrong with me? What's wrong with me?
What have I done? Why am I like this?
Why do I not understand that every single human being on earth,
like the ones you know, the ones you don't know, but especially the ones that you rely on every day,
the people that you just, in the truest sense of the phrase, take for granted?
Why is it so hard for us to go about our fucking day-to-day understanding that it's while very unlikely
but perfectly possible that someone will be gone tomorrow?
And why can't we treat everybody and ourselves?
I don't just mean like, oh, I was mean to this guy.
What I was was completely just, I just didn't regard him as anything other than a load-bearing pillar of what we were doing,
that there would one day be some silly vacation to celebrate retirement or something, some opportunity,
maybe even the funeral of a person that was supposed to go on some schedule that I apparently think death works on,
where we would finally sit down and interact as human beings.
That's my narcissism, parsing another person's death.
It's all about me, I guess, but I just feel like I'm made of straw tonight.
I feel like if I move too quickly, my hand will fly off.
I just feel like everything is so delicate.
How long did you know him for?
Well, he's been there since the beginning, I mean since the moment that it became not a little pilot,
a little idea to the moment that it needed to start pulling up its big boy pants and being on the air, he was there.
And he was unmistakably the reason why we're able to take something so childish where there's people having me sign
a corporate manufactured thing where the name of the character is Mr. Poopy Butthole.
The reason why you can be that stupid and childish and yet be so lucrative, compatible with mainstream society
is because the guy is making the trains run on time.
It's coming to us from the Simpsons and the world of getting the job done.
If everybody was like me and Justin, you'd be watching two episodes of Rick and Morty every eight years.
And it was out of the blue. I don't think I've ever met him.
Totally out of the blue.
And Levi said he was with him yesterday and everything was fine.
The crew went to the baseball game.
The upside is that he was surrounded by co-workers and they were all having a great time.
His wife and he just put a daughter in college and I just think it's such a rollercoaster ride.
All of these things, I guess that's the bargaining phase of...
Great for you.
You're kind of like, well, good thing it doesn't have a kid that's like six.
And then I'm like, are you kidding me?
A young adult has to spend the...
They're crossing a threshold into the rest of their life and you get this kneecap.
There's a little hatch here.
I do two things.
I go numb and I get mad.
And I think that comes from upbringing and there's a hatch here where if I were to open it,
which I won't do because it's bad podcasting,
it does have to do with thinking about his wife who Rob and I was one of the first people that we worked with.
She was the casting director on Heat Vision and Jack and I'm just...
They were two lovely people.
They were just like great, wonderful people.
It's that thought because then that connects to the idea of my God.
What if something happened to Cody?
What if something happened to me?
It's just that I can't... I'm opening that hatch by saying I'm not opening that hatch.
I can't go there.
My deepest sympathies and condolences to his family and I guess that's...
I felt like I'd be remiss in not saying that this happened,
but at the same time, I could have said nothing.
I don't consider it our job to stop the world and that doesn't do anybody any favors.
I'm just very confused.
I think there's one more thing that I would say about it,
which is the continual frustration throughout the day of wanting someone to say something that finally makes sense,
which I finally atoned with by around 3 p.m. today where I suddenly realized that,
wait a minute, my big pet peeve with the deaths that we encounter is people making too much sense of them.
I've talked about that here before.
I was telling Dino today, Dino and I, no matter what we do until the day we finally die,
and no matter how we die, if Dino or I walk under a piano and it falls on us,
people are going to make sense of that death.
They're going to go like, well, he had a problematic life and he was probably in the wrong place at the wrong time.
That piano had his name on it, the way and the choices he made.
That's my big pet peeve, in spite of the fact that as we all know, Dave Foley drinks 50 cups of coffee a day.
There's an instinct in us that no matter what happens to Dave, if he lives to 110 grade,
if something terrible happens tomorrow, we want it to make sense because we are afraid of death.
This happened because of that.
I got that figured out.
I think the subtext of that is this really, really arrogant idea that all of us left
belonged to some club that made the right decisions and that is really offensive.
At least because it was so, it was like, I was getting angry about the nonsense of it.
This is a healthy man.
He played hockey.
He was ripped, man.
He was visceral.
I'm like, someone tell me something and then I finally came around to, no, nobody tell me anything.
Please, dear God, give me a senseless death.
Give me a confusing one.
Let me go quickly and let people be puzzled by it.
I think that may be the equivalent of leaving a little pencil splash in the pool and an Olympic dive.
If you know, just like no turbulence to the point where people are like, how'd that work?
God speed you, Mike.
Just to make it about me one more time, I can't believe that guy left this world.
His story ends with Trump being president and me still working on a fucking draft of a script.
I hope his last moments weren't fucking having to deal with my horrible bottleneck effect on production.
Working on this fucking draft and he's the guy that has to, he's got to be the hero.
He's got to absorb all that energy.
I just hate myself for not turning that thing in, but it's stupid because getting to go to a baseball game is more important
than he wasn't going to get joy out of me finishing a draft.
I talked enough about that.
I had one item on my list, but it was kind of like, I think maybe Spencer, that's probably for a Spencer night.
I don't want you to feel left out.
You're saving your best up for Spencer?
I don't like this term hot swappable with hard drives.
I just think it's a lie.
You get a drive, like a little thing that, oh, this reads these kind of cards or these disks and it's hot swappable.
And the implication there is that, oh, so I can poke a little stick into my computer.
I can write some stuff on it and I can pop it out, throw it in the other thing that I want to think.
And the computer won't go, hey, what are you doing?
Oh, inject much.
But it does do that no matter what.
There is no such thing as a hot swappable drive.
Thank you.
I'll be Spencer for you during this.
I think he just did it.
That was it?
Yeah.
I was just going to add, yeah, man.
Yeah, it's rough.
Yeah.
Yeah, what you really want to do is you get yourself a network card.
Oh, man.
You got real blazing speeds there, real blazing speeds.
Where is he?
Where is Spencer?
Spencer goes from that low.
Yeah, man.
He's down here.
But then he gets really up here.
He's got a lot of range.
I don't know where Spencer is.
Are we worried about him?
Well, he's not here and you're doing reverse.
Hot swappable.
Yeah.
Maybe Spencer's hot swappable.
He's just at a different podcast.
I really hope this is not a long answer, but what is hot swapping?
That's where you poop on somebody's chest, right?
Well, I would say a stint.
I think in general, the concept is just the idea of being able to...
Steve Levy in the booze, everybody.
Steve Levy.
Hello, Steve.
That's an option.
Whatever.
Spencer took the night off.
Oh.
What?
Poor beleaguered saltmine worker, Rob Schrab.
Oh, you owe your soul to the company store, right?
This poor guy.
That's an option.
What are you, Fred Flintstone?
Mr. Slate?
I'm just whipping you.
Yeah, I got to make you come talk to Ed Newmire,
the author of the Robocop screenplay.
That was an awkward way to introduce our guest.
Let's bring out Ed Newmire.
Hello, Ed.
Hello.
Dan, don't screw this up.
This is really important to me tonight.
I'm sorry about those awful chairs.
Introduce or give him the, you know, the introduction
that a fellow of his stature deserves.
I mean, my introduction of you would be one of my rambling things
or Jeff would cut me off and say, please welcome Ed Newmire
in the middle of me trying to introduce you
because I'd be like, look, we've had some legends up here.
I get nervous.
I am a bad interviewer.
But there's a difference here where it's just like,
genuinely you are a hero to me.
You're a person that just exemplifies, like,
not only to me what we'll talk about,
whether you think this is true,
but it demonstrates the highest kind of, like,
coda of the craft of writing movies
and also, like, demonstrates that that pays off,
that you pick your shots and whatever.
But let's get to know you a little bit
because, God, I'm a bad interviewer.
But I think that we'll go through the early biography.
Like, are you a Californian?
Were you born here?
I was actually born in Vienna, Austria by Chance
and I grew up in the Marin County,
San Francisco Bay Area, Marin County.
I grew up in San Samo.
And you were a journalism major?
Yeah, my parents were both journalists
and so that followed me through high school.
I was the editor of my high school newspaper.
But I always wanted to do movies.
Was there anything, too, because I was also a journalism major
and my justification for it being from Wisconsin
was that I couldn't possibly make the leap
to, well, I'm going to major in writing.
I'm going to be a writer.
I'm going to be creative for a living.
I had to find a Midwestern-compatible version
of being a person that sits at a typewriter
that also felt enough like welding to...
Was there anything to that?
It was kind of the first time I ever had a little thing
where you could do something.
And I immediately started turning it into a place to do...
I used to do violent satires, like my friend
who was the school president.
We shot him in front of the school.
We did Zapruder films and things like that.
Certainly, propaganda is such a huge part
of some of the most effective parts
of the things you're most known for,
like the groupers, like both really interesting things
to talk about.
But both of them have these Shakespearean heralds
that are the media.
And so I imagine...
I think I was always interested in that stuff.
And I was literally all my...
Some of my friends now were my people who were...
Like Woodward and Bernstein were big guys.
And so I know the guys who knew them and stuff like that.
I know a lot of journalists and that kind of thing.
And that was an exciting idea.
That here was the chorus.
I don't know, it was an interesting device also.
And it was cheap.
You could do a lot of things without spending any money.
It's the same as having a guy come out
and explain the Montague's and the Capulets.
They're just like, well, here's what's going on.
But the more important thing is that unlike that guy,
the world as a character...
Detroit is a character in Robocop.
It's so important to understand the relationship
between people and media, what's going on in the world.
And even though the whole story takes place
in a really gritty, local part of this new earth,
it's so effective to be able to zoom in
from a global perspective.
Right, and show other little parts of that world
and imply a bigger world.
And that was always there.
And it was something that...
I think Verhoeven had a big fight about that at one point
because I always wanted it to be completely separate
from the story, that it was different.
One time he said, well, maybe we'll be in a TV studio
and you'll see the news and you'll...
And I was like, I don't know why I was this way.
I was 27 years old.
I was like, no, that's terrible. You can't do that.
We had a huge fight about it.
Oh, really?
Yeah, and then he came around and he said,
okay, all right, I get it.
And then he said it was more...
He said, oh, that's actually more modern.
That's a really Brechtian idea.
I don't think he said Brechtian, but it is a Brechtian idea.
Okay, well, yeah, I'm kidding.
So because part of this is your story is interesting
because Robocop, correct me if I'm wrong,
this is your first screen credit.
It's your first project.
Right.
I came to the business.
I went to UCLA Film School and then my girlfriend
broke up with me and I couldn't finish UCLA's film school.
But I got a job on taxi and they paid me $175 a month
or something to be a runner.
And I did that for a little while.
You were a PA on taxi and which made us immediately go,
oh, was there an intersection between you and Sam Simon?
And the answer's no, but...
No, no, but I did...
I was the guy who used to sit outside the door
and wait for the script pages.
And I had to drive them to a place called Barber's Place
and they typed them up and then I had to pick them up
at six in the morning.
And Barber's Place was what?
It was a typing place.
It was just where you typed your scripts up.
This was before there were computers.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah, I need myself.
They would type it.
It's not a copy place.
It was like they would just type them on.
No, they would literally...
There were a bunch of people who sat up, mostly women,
who sat up all night and re-typed the scripts.
And then they were delivered to the...
They would take drafts with notes on them and stuff like that
and just do a clean copy of them.
Right, because there's no word processing.
They would give them to a guy and they would drive them
in their little car and then go pick up a box of scripts.
We were talking about this afternoon,
like how there were so many roadblocks back then.
And people still got stuff done.
Like, where is it today?
It's like, oh, I can't connect with a Wi-Fi and print.
Fuck it.
Just fuck it.
You know, it's like...
I mean, including us, Jonathan.
Yeah, we were talking today about, you know,
as people tend to in the loss of a colleague,
we're having drinks and we're suddenly going
through our whole lives.
And yeah, we were briefly marveling
in how we had a radio show in Milwaukee
and how we would get up at 5 a.m.,
drink two pots of coffee, write five scripts,
get in a car, drive them down icy roads
to a Kinko's because they had a printer
and pay them the money that they wanted
to print up these scripts and then drive.
It's like, yeah, I would never do that these days.
Yeah.
Anyways, but you...
And then right from that PA job,
it says your Wikipedia page is so joyfully Spartan.
You're a proofreader at Paramount?
No, I was a scriptreader.
I was a reader in the Story Analyst Guild.
And they pay people.
You probably...
Doing coverage?
To do coverage for executives.
And you read everything that comes in
and you do a report on it.
Yeah, they call a proofreader on your Wikipedia.
You're going to...
Yeah.
Someone's going to bring the hammer down.
Do you remember any of the scripts that you read that went,
oh, this is great.
Somebody...
No, no, I did.
I remember reading Star Wars.
Star Wars.
I read War Games and I said,
you should make this movie.
And they said, nobody wants to see a movie
about nuclear war.
And then you said, but I can get you Daphne Coleman.
And then I read a script which I really...
I made my reputation at Columbia Pictures on these...
I read a risky business and I wrote a coverage for it.
It was like 18 pages long, which is not what you want
when you're an executive at the morning meeting.
And I said, this is the greatest movie in the world.
You have to make it.
And there was a memo came around and said,
Frank Price, the chairman, saying that there would no longer be
any coverage longer than two pages.
And then when the movie came out,
they were interested in me suddenly.
And when the movie came out, I bet somebody 100 bucks,
the vice president, that it was going to be a hit.
And it was.
And then suddenly they offered me a job.
And for a moment, I was an executive who had his finger
on the pulse of youth.
And that lasted for about a year at Universal.
And I wasn't really suited for it.
I read that you were offered to be the vice president at Universal.
I was on a track.
They called them CEs now.
I was a junior executive.
And that's sort of how I learned all the business stuff,
if you will.
And I was under a VP.
And yes, if I had stayed there, I would have been a VP,
which I later was at another production company,
Martin Rantsehoff.
I was the VP of development and stuff like that.
And this is where it gets really interesting.
And this is where I start to kind of worship you
in the story of your path.
Because in the underworld, where the werewolves of suits
and the vampires of writers are in constant war,
you can root for one or the other.
And there's all kinds of hybrids that are exciting and heroic.
But there is a war nonetheless.
And so there is something really romantic about a guy
that does what you did.
You can just imagine the biopic tee-up of this moment,
where you have this easier, you know, you're on this path.
And then for whatever reason, you decide,
no, I'd like to go behind door number two.
I'm going to abandon this career of being liked,
being on the side that calls the shots, makes the money.
Because I'm really passionate about this idea.
I had called Robocop.
It's true.
During this period, I thought, I'm really not this guy.
I don't want to have...
I wasn't good at returning 100 phone calls a day.
And there were people who were.
There were people I really admired who really were good at that.
Some of them are good writers, too.
I mean, Mike Waldron, a shout out to him,
he was kind of an Ed Newmeyer at Star Burns,
my little studio where it was like,
you hire young people,
and you make them do the stuff you're too busy to do.
Some of it is reading other people's stuff, taking...
It's like, he's a very handsome kid from Georgia,
and people like talking to him,
and he doesn't mind talking on the phone,
and I remember him saying to me,
just so you remember, I did come out here to be a writer,
and I was like, too bad, you're a daywalker.
Like, Whistler's got more plans for you.
But I will return the favor to you
if you do this shitty neurotypical stuff.
I will help you as much as I can.
And it amazes me that some people are just good at both,
that there are charming people who...
Yeah, they're good writers.
They're just cursed with this networking ability.
You know, I don't think I really did.
I wasn't comfortable with that.
I was never... I never felt cool enough for the job.
And when I meet executives over time,
they all seem much cooler than I ever was.
Do you buy into the dichotomy of the introvert versus the extrovert,
where it's like the introvert is recharging their batteries
while they're alone, while they're operating individually,
and they don't mind interacting with other people,
but that's a discharge.
And then there are some people who are actually receiving
an energy charge from of all things
interacting with other people.
And it gets them through having to play Minecraft,
which blows my fucking mind.
They're just sitting there,
so I hope the phone rings.
That's you.
When you're sitting at home, you're like,
God damn it.
I get ants in my pants.
I gotta go out and be around the people.
So then you can recharge and get through those lonely nights
between the sticks calling you
and having you come out to a concert.
I don't think we talked about my tour with sticks enough.
I replaced Tommy's shot.
No, that's a...
Okay, come on.
Yeah, I am an extrovert.
I don't think I need other people to totally recharge,
but I do...
I don't know.
I think it's both ways.
I need to be alone,
but I also need to be around people.
And both of those are...
Recharge and discharge in a way.
Well, okay.
All right, so...
Come on, man.
You figured out a way to be...
You don't have to choose one or the other.
I'm not sure if I can answer this right,
but what I would say is...
I always want to...
When I was...
Many years ago, when I wrote Robocop,
and when it was successful,
there were times that I would entertain myself
of thinking, well, I did this and I did that.
I did that and I did that.
Like thinking about...
And then now, more and more,
I think, well, no, I did that because Paul was there,
and we talked about this.
And we did this because John Davidson said,
well, you can have 25 cents to do that
and some 10-foil.
And there were a lot of people involved in that process
that made it what it was.
Age sweetens the recognition of the myth...
That the auteur myth is an auteur.
You start to open up to...
So Verhoeven and I get together,
and we've been getting together for 35 years,
and we've done most of our work over breakfast.
And we get together now still.
We just did recently.
And the last time we got together,
all we did was talk about what a great producer
John Davidson was
and how the movie never would have happened
without John Davidson in a million different ways.
Now, John and Paul didn't even speak during the movie.
They couldn't even talk to each other in the room.
I was the middle child who would try to get the parents
to come in and talk,
and then they would run out after cursing at each other.
But now, they realize that it was...
Well, I think they even did then.
When you wrote it,
did you always, while you were writing this,
because this is going to be called Robocop?
I did.
No, no, it never ever happened to me since,
but it actually...
I was working as a reader,
and then Columbia Pictures was out,
not in Culver City,
but it was in Burbank on a lot called TBS then,
which is now known as the Warner Brothers Lot.
And I had an office right next to the...
It was a trailer office,
and it was right next to one of the big backlots.
And suddenly, they were making this giant picture,
this giant science fiction picture,
which no one would tell you what it was.
And I would get out of...
I would leave my office,
and I would go out onto the set.
And what I really wanted to do in those days was make a movie.
And there were so many people on this movie
that they didn't know who was working on it and who wasn't.
They were shooting all night,
and so I would go and work on the art department
and stay there until about three or four in the morning.
And I said,
so what's the first night?
What's this movie about?
And it's about a robot,
and they pointed at a girl in a tutu
and said, that's a robot.
And it was Blade Runner.
And then I watched them shoot someone Blade Runner.
I was on that set.
It was extraordinary.
I'd never seen anything like it.
And then about three o'clock in the morning,
one night, I sort of had this idea
of what I thought a robot should look like on that street.
And it was looking...
It was a robot that looked a little like Robocop.
And it was next to that blue car.
They call it the spinner.
And suddenly, the title just...
came into my mind, like Robocop.
Boom.
And it was really weird.
And I think it's the power of location.
I truly do.
If you are on a...
It's very...
At least for me, location and architecture
and things like that,
are very creative ideas come to me in that.
And I think that was such a supercharged set
for a young man to be on, like...
Now, looking backwards through...
So that kid who's having that moment is like,
okay, I think I'm gonna write this movie.
It's gonna be called Robocop.
I don't want him to be in a tutu.
I want him to...
Whatever happened to the...
It's a very Schrabby sounding thing.
This is Rob Schrab.
I'm Rob Schrab.
To be like, come on, it's a robot.
Hello.
If you knock on it, your hand should hurt.
And after like 30 years, it becomes a...
That was the original poster.
The poster for you kids was Robocop climbing out of the car
and the poster said,
part man, part machine, all cop.
And I remember being 15 and I was like,
here's the thing is that until you see that movie,
until you see a frame of it,
I mean, you're a wash in a world of like,
oh, Spielberg came out with six pieces of crap,
one of them will stick and write history.
And you're very...
You're jaded even back then.
And you have permission to be jaded.
And I saw that poster and I was like,
this is...
This misses the mark.
This is silly.
What do they mean Robocop?
Like Schrab said backstage.
It sounds like a kid's movie.
Now, this is the difficult part of the question.
So this kid who's visualizing this,
at that point, where are you at tonally?
Are you thinking to yourself...
That part of the point of it is that it's going to be
a disarming like hypodermic for some seriously
like potent kind of edge?
Or are you simply at that time going like,
gee whiz robots are swell?
Yeah, no, no.
I think the answer is there were two levels going on.
There was this has to be a movie for eight year olds or whatever.
And this has to be a movie for people who were thinking.
And it can be both of those things at the same time.
I don't think I immediately thought that.
What I thought was I want to make a movie about business
and how the corporate world is a dangerous world.
I wanted to see businessmen killing each other.
And that that was because...
You weren't thinking that.
I was thinking that.
Oh, okay, sorry.
That's what I was really thinking about the time
was before robots even was,
oh, I want to do a world about business
where executives actually kill each other.
And so that title, the idea that would always be called that title,
and the fact that that title sounds a little silly.
From the very beginning, that was all as designed.
You were thinking, it's like naming your movie
like Mr. Stretchy or something.
It's kind of like supposed to sound childish.
I used to say it's good.
I used to say, oh, that's really stupid.
Meaning that's really good.
That's really wonderful.
Fucking love it.
That was my big go-to was, oh, that's kind of stupid.
Let's do that.
Monster House.
The house is a monster.
Kung Fu Panda.
But it did imply another part of this world
that also had to support all of that.
And the more difficult part of it was to convince people
that it could be funny.
Everybody wanted it to be straight.
And it was, I always knew it would have impact.
But I really had this theory,
maybe someone else had had it,
but as a young man trying to figure out how to write a screenplay,
I had this idea that if you had a really, really violent scene
that was shocking, and then you told a joke,
even a bad one afterwards, it would be much funnier.
And that was one of the things that was invested throughout writing.
When I think of the movies, we all love this movie to pieces.
We always talk about what are the few, like,
handful of just perfect movies that you wouldn't take anything out of
or add anything to.
And Robocop is for us definitely one of those movies.
I think it's very sad.
It's an incredibly sad film.
At the core, it's a really depressing story.
And it's really about how he's...
I remember I was, I think what you do when you do something the first time
or what I often hear other people talking about
is you're kind of making up your own rules for how you do something
and you have to figure it out yourself.
And that was really, that was me trying to figure out something.
How does three acts work?
Here's the beginning, middle, and the end.
I mean, boy, you've lost.
You wielded the fucking...
It's really intimidating
because I actually...
God damn it.
I still haven't...
I still can't write a decent three act story.
And part of my training was trying to get Sid Field's stuff to work for me
by deconstructing Robocop and Die Hard really specifically.
And even more so than Die Hard,
which I really fetishize a great deal on this stage.
Robocop is just...
It's uncanny the structural integrity of that story.
Can I ask a bunch of questions here, please?
Okay, so...
What's it like to kiss a girl?
Shut up. Just shut up.
Just shut your mouth.
Don't listen to him.
It wasn't me.
Shut up.
So how many drafts of this?
I mean, you wrote it, you unspec,
did you do multiple drafts before you started handing it around?
Did you start doing multiple drafts when John Davidson and Paul Verhoeven got involved?
I have a partner on this, so let me get to that.
So the way it worked was I was sort of a semi-miserable junior executive at Universal,
and I was trying to meet people that were interesting to me.
So I actually put the word out to UCLA film schools, particularly because I'd been there,
that anybody who wanted to come in and talk to me could.
And so all these people who didn't pay any attention to me before came to see me,
among the Michael Miner, who was seven years older than I was,
and he was kind of a star at UCLA.
He made a movie and he had been a DP,
and he said, what do you want to do?
Well, I'm working on this movie about a robot, and I told him,
it's called Robocop, and it's about a robot, and I told him the story,
and he was like, oh, let's do that.
And I didn't really have anything much better on.
I had slowed down a little bit with it.
It was taking me about a year since I had done it.
So I said, OK, why don't we write a script together?
And I had it fairly well outlined the first act, as it is now, more or less.
And the ending was there, and the middle was a little bit more of a mess.
And the first thing I did was I kind of wanted to write the first act on my own.
I didn't want to hurt Michael's feelings, but I didn't know him that well yet,
and I wanted to make sure I was getting it.
And so I told my bosses at Universal that my grandfather had died.
He had died a long time ago.
So it wasn't a lie.
He died in World War II.
I had to go, and I went back to San Enselmo where I grew up,
and a friend had left me their house to work on,
and I wrote the first act in about two weeks.
And during that time, they sent me flowers, which I felt really bad about.
And when I came back, I had to go back to work, and I stopped working.
And then we kind of finished it on nights and weekends,
but the first act sort of set the tone.
And then we had a really rough draft, and we gave it to some friends.
And I gave it to, I had made friends who knew a guy named John Davison,
who had done Airplane, and I had heard about him.
John Davison was a particular character, had a particular way of speaking,
and everybody would imitate the way he talked.
And I could even kind of talk like him before I met him.
But when I had the script, I gave it to a friend of his,
a director named Jonathan Kaplan, that a friend of a friend knew,
hoping that he would give it to John Davison.
And he did give it to John Davison.
He said John Davison would be perfect for this.
And it was sort of amazing because John Davison was perfect for it,
for a whole bunch of reasons.
Wait, wait, he did Airplane.
He did Airplane?
That seems like a weird fit.
Well, except it was funny.
And I wanted this to be funny.
So I think that was helpful.
Other people read it, and they thought it was serious,
and they thought it should be serious.
He was the only one who said,
ah, this could be funny, you know?
And he had the cash, he had proven that...
Well, he had a deal with Orion.
He was a really, he is a very, a penurious producer.
He makes everything as cheap as he can.
Penurious.
That's a new word for me.
Not a new word for any of those languages.
I just the first time I've ever heard that word.
He's not just a writer.
He makes up words all the time.
At what point did the prime directives like start coming in?
Because I want to talk about the ending at one point, because...
Well, how about later?
It's an ending.
That's why he says later.
Here's what, I'll pitch you what I want to talk about.
You can tell us who's a better...
Well, I'm so curious about now the Verhoeven entering this picture,
because I'm picturing the producers and it's springtime for Hitler.
Verhoeven character enters the story.
Let me fast forward to this.
We get set up.
We get a deal at Orion, which is a big deal for people who have never done anything before.
We go over there and they give us some notes.
One of the notes was somehow the bad guy Clarence and the guy at the top, Dick Jones,
should be somehow joined.
That was the only real work we took from them.
That's a good note.
It was a good note.
And so we wrote a second draft.
And midway through the draft, I turned to Michael and I said,
Michael, this can be funny.
It's okay if it's funny.
And we started having fun writing a script.
Now, that has never happened to me since and hadn't happened to me before.
But it was fun for about two weeks.
And we laughed and we made jokes and we couldn't believe how entertaining we were.
And we wrote it pretty well.
Is that where the absurd elements, I'd buy that for a dollar, runner, or is that?
I'd have to look and see.
I'd buy that for a dollar.
I had spent some time at Paramount around all the Gary Marshall sitcoms.
So that was my attempt at coming up with a tagline for a...
By the way, when your system is shocked, and we all know this from writing a roller coaster,
I mean, not only are you having this weird, like, why am I laughing? I'm terrified.
So we're already familiar with, like, you can get a good laugh out of somebody who's scared shitless
or upset just like...
Yeah, it's a pressure release.
Traumatized, absolutely.
But it also occurs to me that it works the opposite way, too.
The villains in Robocop are especially traumatizing.
And therefore, you're very immersed in Peter Weller's character, Murphy, who becomes Robocop.
Like, his conduit to becoming Robocop is a horrible, violent trend.
And it's absolutely more horrific because these guys are goofballs.
They fancy themselves real cut-ups.
And their leader, played by Kirkwood Smith, is like, I had never seen a receding hairline guy
with glasses playing a villain in an action movie.
That counted as diversity back then.
Because he looked like he should be giving James Bond his weapons in a lab, and he's the big bad.
He was so effective, the sway he held over his minions, the way they interacted with each other,
the fact that they watched television and enjoyed it, that they went in and out of being grody.
It was just, you felt...
He taught Bobby how to fly?
You felt so...
Well, that's an example.
Yeah, I mean, he's not gonna slow his adrenaline junkiness down.
He's throwing one of his minions, the thing, but it was just like, you're watching Peter Weller go into that warehouse,
and if you're watching this movie a sixth, seventh, eight hundredth time,
you're now realizing that this first act has been so cold riveted tightly that the corporate story has been mentioning offhand.
Yes, we've been relocating candidates according to risk factor,
and that you're going like, oh, God, and Peter Weller was available...
Murphy was available for that job.
He was a candidate that was relocated according to risk factor.
Why?
Because his kid loves TJ Laser.
He wants to...
Nancy Allen asks him, what are you doing with your gun?
He's like, well, I just want to learn this thing.
So is that the desire of the character to be a good cop?
Yeah.
I think it is, actually.
To be a cowboy.
I was looking at your story cycle, and I thought, oh, the scene where he says,
my kid wants me to be a good cop, and all good cops do that.
He has...
We're going to find out through ghostly flashbacks as this character that we become is trapped in this metal cage,
but we'll find out that he actually had an idyllic life.
We can only speculate that it wasn't enough for him for what reason.
God, the best reason of all, not because he was tired of fucking his beautiful wife, not because he wished he had more money,
because he felt like maybe he was failing as a dad.
And I would say the subtext there was like, you're seeing the flashbacks.
The kid is watching television.
He's watching TJ Laser.
These days, what that would be is the kid was so absorbed in his iPad,
or he was literally jacked into some video game, and it was like, how can I reach this kid?
I want to become a bigger-than-life thing.
I want this kid to understand that law enforcement can be heroic,
which is absolutely the opposite realization that this world is going through.
They're having their first police strike following the purchase of the police at the hands of a consumer electronics company.
And so the cops are having this...
There's just so many goddamn details.
I just went off on this weird off-road thing.
But yeah, I mean, I do. It's funny that you're asking.
And that's another thing that I think is so amazing about the job is that you can ask questions like that,
even though you wrote the goddamn script, because how much of the...
This job is about channeling, isn't it?
It's not clear how much you can know and how much just comes in somehow.
It's really amazing when it happens, and it's not reliable.
I truly believe that these things are out there, and that when we're doing our best,
we're doing the opposite of proving that we're good at what we do.
We're actually only able to untighten some sphincter in us just enough to accidentally let something noble.
That just needs an antenna.
I don't know if we were trying to do anything noble,
but it was like just pursuing the things you were interested in and really saying,
well, there were all sorts of things that...
Like, Ed 209, when I sat down with Phil Tippett, we started looking at certain kind of Japanese things,
and then I said, yeah, but what this is really about, Phil, is it's really like, it's kind of the Vietnam War.
This is a Huey helicopter, and this guy, Dr. McNamara, is there, and it's...
I didn't push that there, but I was always in the background there,
and then when you look at it, you realize, oh, that is kind of like a helicopter.
That is kind of like that.
And with Rabotin, who did the suit, we talked...
So fucking cool.
And Rabotin is a great artist.
I mean, these are...
He had him, Phil Tippett, I mean, Jesus.
And he said, and one day, many years later, I said, you know,
it's really interesting because it's all about Detroit.
And what I...
The book I had read kind of as research for this was a book called The Reckoning by David Halberstam,
all about how Detroit and Nissan had gone to war and Detroit had lost.
And it was about the decline of the American car.
And that was like what I was writing about with the decline of corporate stuff.
I was a kid who liked cars.
And this was the meaning of it.
And when you look at...
One day I said to Rabotin, I said, it really looks like a truck, man.
It looks like a ram truck or something like it.
It looks like American road iron.
And Rabotin was like, oh, I like that.
But I think it really did.
I think he channeled that because it looks like a car in a weird way.
When you look at the design...
And they end up at an abandoned steel mill.
I mean, it's where he has to go.
It's where metal is made and unmade.
No, it's all about the rust belt. And that's why it was Detroit.
And that's why it was this kind of thing.
And I remember the line producer saying, well, come on.
We can shoot it.
And Los Angeles can go home at night.
But somehow going to Pittsburgh to this horrible little...
This awful place where the town had fallen apart
around this old steel mill that was haunted.
And backstage...
Fun fact, we established that.
It's Ed 209 and his name is also Ed.
So he threw that one in there.
I love that.
If I could show you a tally of the number of times in 20 years
that in the most important of conversations that I've had,
and it's important to me relative to what I was working on,
how important it was for me to try to communicate something,
the number of times that I have referenced story points in Robocop
so that I could achieve some kind of vocabulary with whoever I'm talking to,
whether or not they'd seen the movie.
Because honestly, as long as I know what I'm talking about,
then maybe I have a chance of explaining to this other person.
Otherwise, I'm just babbling this like paste of fucking like...
Non-connected references.
But for me to be able to dive into a story that is so well constructed
that I can also then later when I'm talking to the same person go,
remember that thing I keep referencing Robocop?
Well, now we're talking about this part of the story.
So again, I'm going to reference that.
Now you already know what I explain to you.
Every threshold, the atonement with the father being so literal,
it's amazing that that was a note that a suit gave that was like,
eh, and it's such a...
From the mouths of babes or capitalists,
it's just sort of like, I'd like to see both bad guys be cousins.
It's kind of a shrug like, yeah, it'd be easier to follow about.
But it's like, I had heard like,
Brillstein or Gray or somebody like when Bob and David pitched Mr. Show,
they were like, it should be Mr. Show with Bob and David.
Otherwise, people like people.
But it was sort of like, you guys should come out and introduce the show.
And then at the time, I think they thought that was such a ridiculous
like baby boomerang note.
But I mean, it's like, god damn, what a great note.
But you could take a stopwatch
and you could take a circle and break the 360 degrees down
so that every second meant how many pages or whatever.
And you could go around that movie
and kaboom the moment when Joseph Campbell, who has never met you
and who didn't even like movies, is talking about the importance
of this sort of like going to meet your maker
and how the extent to which you are still driven by fear
is the extent to which the ogre aspect of the father will present itself
and be impenetrable and only through just this cosmic pummeling
by that maker's hand are you ever going to atone and become your own maker
and realize I kicked my own ass back there.
Robocop has rounded up his road of friles of bad guys.
Like Clint Eastwood character, he's haunted by these visions of people
who killed his human counterpart.
And he's going and knocking them off one by one.
Just full of dollars.
And then the trail leads to the Clarence Bonnaker,
I believe probably right at the fucking meeting with the goddess point
is like it's Dick Jones.
Dick Jones runs OCP, OCP runs the cops, you're a cop.
He just lays it out.
But that's a lovely line, isn't it?
It's fantastic.
All of your lines are lovely.
They're all really like kind of hyper attenuated B movie lines.
And you understand that because another thing is another thing that makes you a hero.
You're the only audio commentary that I've ever listened all the way through on a DVD.
And I was just sucked in because you were so,
it was like all of a sudden you're just listening to a guy that understands Robocop.
And he wrote it.
It's just not, you know how it is.
You meet people who worked on such and such and you want to have,
you ask them one question and then the very first answer is sort of like,
oh, okay.
You become disillusioned.
It's a prismatic kind of spraying of your mythologization of something into a realization
that everything's a fluke and it was just sort of like a bunch of random stuff.
To hear a writer on an audio commentary,
just you're so unabashed.
There's a point when Nancy Wilson's character, Nancy Allen,
Nancy Allen's character is being introduced and you're describing the importance of Peter Weller watching her
and that she kicks somebody's ass and that she takes off her helmet and then she like throws it to somebody
and then like, and then you're just talking and talking about the importance of these characters
and things and then you say something like you're like,
and then that's why it was important for me that Murphy had a line
and it's coming up right here and I'll loop it for you,
cool stuff or whatever his line is.
It was an ad lib that Peter did where he looks at her and goes,
pretty neat.
Now he's probably right.
He probably needed a line there that I didn't give him,
but I always thought, again, as a young arrogant writer,
I thought, oh, that's a stupid line.
I was being mean by following it there.
But if you've ever seen a commentary where the person that's talking is so in sync with what you're watching
that they actually just bother to recreationally like,
dub the lips of the person as they do a line,
and that's when it came up with the Hasta la vista, baby anyway.
It's just so satisfying.
It's what you dream of as a consumer.
It's because I wrote all the Foley and all the background dialogue and everything
and was in for the recording.
Oh, sorry.
That's another 40 pages of writing.
Schrab's turn.
OK, Schrab Corner.
Let me ask you these fucking questions about the goddamn shape of the hat.
So anyway, was the Prime Directive stuff, was that always from the first draft?
There were always Prime Directives.
And I don't remember what they were in the first draft,
but there was always a Prime Directive.
And then we sat down with a guy named Forrest Ackerman.
This is why John Davison was such a great guy.
He said, I want you to meet this guy.
And this old guy in a trench coat comes to sit in his John's office and he says,
He's the famous monster.
I read your script.
Yeah, I didn't even realize how famous he was.
And well, you know, Asimov said there should be three rules of robotics.
So you should have three.
So it became three.
And one of them, literally, we were at lunch one day,
and there was a fortune cookie that said,
you serve the public trust.
And I went, God, no.
And there was always the forth-classified one.
Well, hey, hey.
I got it.
The fortune cookie wrote your movie.
The Prime Directive.
That is such a brilliant thing because it is like Asimov,
and it's a robot movie.
So you're going, oh, OK, so we have to do this.
But it comes up a couple of times.
It comes up, I believe, three times in the film.
And then finally, the fucking home run of an ending.
Robocop is off the top of my head.
The three best endings, I think, of all time are like Star Wars.
Robocop and Get Out was like, it's like you're taking your character
at the lowest point and then making him go to the highest point.
And the quicker you can do that, the more likely
you're going to get a standing ovation, which is what I did
when he said, Dick, you're fired.
The first time I saw it in 87, I stood up in the theater
and went, fucking yeah.
And then as the credits are rolling, I said, we're going back
tomorrow to see this movie.
This is the best movie ever because it's so...
There's something really, really satisfying about the violence at the end.
You must have been when you were done typing that one.
Oh, shit.
Let's find some...
Oh, my fingers are smoking.
Oh, my God.
No.
You had your shirt off like Hugh Jackman and Swordfish.
Holy shit.
You went to Barbara's place and made two women leave the typewriters.
Because at the end of the second act, he gets his ass kicked by Ed 209
because he can't arrest Ronnie Cox.
Because the world is run by money.
He can't do anything.
He's totally blocked and then he goes up and he goes up anyway.
He's like, I'm going to get my ass kicked again,
but he tells the guy's boss, I can't arrest this guy because he works for you.
And he goes, dick, you're fired and then fucking kills him.
And it's the best.
It's so fucking good.
But the roar in 1987 was when he said Murphy, which is what's fascinating to me.
It's a real, like, where did that come from?
And the audience really identifies with that moment.
Well, a little segue, but we can go back to talking about Robocop all night,
but I do think it's such a weird opportunity your career represents
because 10 years apart from each other, you write this amazing film.
It's directed by this guy who just, it works perfectly.
The chemistry between writer and director clearly are just, it just creates this thing.
And all of the collaborators playing their parts.
To have the same writer and director 10 years later work together again.
And to have them be unmistakably doing the thing that they were doing in the other movie.
I went to see Starship Troopers, incredibly excited, more grown up now.
Having spent 10 years like asking myself, why do I love Robocop?
And learning your name, learning that there's a thing called screenplays and all these things.
And I go to see Starship Troopers.
And while I'm unmistakably riveted by all of these details, all of this tone,
there's something missing for me.
And I walked out going like, oh, did I misunderstand Robocop's message?
Did Robocop actually, was Robocop not rooting for humanity?
What's happening here? There was as much irony and cynicism to Starship Troopers.
But I think maybe because it was a war movie and not this movie about this guy, Murphy, the cowboy.
The subjective experience.
Macbeth, Hamlet, Shane, just a dude.
One movie's a gunfighter. It's about a gunfighter.
And I think Americans...
The other movie comes out of a different genre.
It comes out of the movies that were made during World War II to make you go fight.
And there are movies like Air Force by Howard Hawks and Action in the North Atlantic by Edward Dimitriak or something like that.
And they all have this similar...
Propaganda is kind of like...
Their propaganda, but they also have a similar structure that they all kind of follow a similar structure in any event.
It's before the war and there's a bunch of people and then there's a war.
And then they meet a bunch of other people and they all say they kind of meet different kinds of people.
And then they train together and then they learn that one day one of them is going to have to die.
Someone's going to have to send someone to die.
The thing about like...
Sorry to cut you off, Ed.
It's not his personal story.
Yeah. The thing about Murphy is we were talking about tone where we can be funny, we can be violent and everything.
Murphy doesn't know he's in a comedy.
Everything about it is tragic.
He's taking it seriously.
He's kind of a nerd.
He doesn't deserve this.
We feel so bad for him because you don't shy away from the violence when he does get killed.
You don't shy away from the tragedy of his kid and his wife.
When they're waving and you're backing away from his home and his life.
And I think that's why the tone works so well is that the tragedy is real.
The relatability is real and everything else is kind of like up to a 11 or 12 or whatever.
Yeah.
Well, I don't think you can discount the power of the trauma of Robocop, the subjective trauma of his true crime worthy experience of being the victim of gang mutilation.
That it's a joke to these sociopaths that he's a cop and he's now in their hands and how much fun they're having torturing him.
Before they finally in a world that clearly has suffered a certain amount of inflation in terms of the amount of bullets a human body can take.
Even they spend too much lead killing Dr. Weller.
I keep forgetting is Dr. Weller as of 2014 Peter Weller got his doctorate in like Renaissance.
I love this history show.
He was so into like Greece.
He just really kind of boner for like pyramids and stuff like that.
Somebody does 70 movies and gets a PhD in something.
You're pretty sure what they got a PhD in.
They're pretty passionate.
I want to watch Robocop tell me about, you know, Sumeria all day long.
It's a fucking way.
If I was an actor in 70 movies, my PhD would be in cocaine.
I'd be dead.
Anyways, the yeah, I just like I just and maybe maybe it's because I was an adolescent.
So I was like, I was coming into your hands like and God was I lucky.
I mean, do you think about just the crap I could have seen while going through puberty.
And and I walked out of a theater in Milwaukee just to my my I could feel my neurology changed.
I it's hard to make another generation understand because you can't even say these days back then there was no internet.
That doesn't make any sense.
But also even even the difference between like a world where like when I Schrab was the first guy to ever show me like a Jackie Chan movie.
It wasn't there.
You didn't see wire work until the matrix.
It was previous to that was a bootleg VHS thing.
You had to you had to be you had to be looking under rocks to see things that didn't feel like E.T.
And and to just wander in and for the same movie ticket price have this completely different psychological serum injected into you and a walk out going.
Why was that funny and violent and and why did it love and hate America?
Why why is it OK for me to be simultaneously rooting for humanity and very cynical about the way the world works?
Like why why is this movie baptized me into a new religion?
I don't how does that work?
Are there other movies like this?
It was a lifesaver and just because you you you bristled when I invoked the word nobility when we talk like I for me nobility just means efficacy in our craft.
Maybe if we were poets or street musicians or doctors we the big three.
You know maybe nobility would have would have to but I affecting lives even just making people laugh.
I don't I don't even mean to it's like oh you changed a little boy's life.
I that doesn't have to be the standard just reach.
You know that's what we do.
It's populism.
It's it's it's it's it's no it's noble when the story is powerful.
I agree listen I agree with you there's nothing more important than that in what we do that somehow I don't know when you were talking I think sometimes there's movies that really hit us and it depends on how old we are and it depends on the movies.
But you know I feel sometimes I've seen a movie like when I saw Chinatown for the first time in a theater I was a young person and I thought I'd been struck by lightning.
Chinatown seems like yeah I can imagine seeing Chinatown in adolescence.
Chinatown I was completely obsessed with Chinatown.
I got I before the Internet before anything before I went out and every time I could I see it and then I would and I got I somehow I met his brother and I got a copy of the script.
I read the script and I outlined the script and that was my that was kind of before I wrote Robocop.
I had this whole obsession with Chinatown.
That's really interesting.
I got the script for Clockwork Orange and sometimes if you look at it you see wow there's a circular structure in Clockwork Orange and there's a circular interesting structure.
So I don't know how that happened but I think it was the things I was interested in were made their way in.
It's interesting to me because Sid Field obsesses about body heat and Chinatown.
And so that's why partly like I'm like god damn it like what about Robocop?
What about Die Hard because I'm of a slightly to maybe a half generation.
No Die Hard is also a movie you can't stop watching.
There's something about it.
But it's funny that you're one of these you're one of these craftsmen between those that you're watching Robert Townes work and you're deconstructing it.
You're learning to program.
You're you're you're you're needing you you're wanting to appeal that onion and figure out how to do it.
For some reason I wanted to be the screenwriter.
Were you a big Western fan?
Yeah, I know I like Westerns.
We used to always talk about OK that we had we had John Wayne rules like that that ran what Robocop could do and what he couldn't do.
We were always aware of those kind of things.
Yeah, because that's I mean the Prime Directive like the Western is a genre.
There's there's a set of a code code you know code of ethics a code of morality and with your Glenn Ford or Gary Cooper or Clint Eastwood or John Wayne that there's there's things there's do's and don'ts.
And you are punished for having that code.
The code is what puts you in peril.
Right.
The bad guys don't have a code.
Their code is do what you want.
And so you're so there's a real fantasy fulfillment when he is killed because.
Essentially because he's a cop and he he gets killed and he comes back as Robocop.
He gets to you can shoot him now.
That's he can't.
And that's really what makes that character.
My favorite Western is High Plains Drifter because he's either a savior or he's Satan.
He's come back to either punish the town or save the town and both at the same times.
And he is you don't know until the very end what exactly he is, but he's never given a name.
But he he he was the brother or was he.
He was the sheriff they killed in the beginning.
I know that's kind of kind of Robocop.
Well, I think those were things.
Those were movies of my youth.
Yeah.
But then he has this kind of invulnerability.
Not that he's bulletproof, but he's got like he comes from like he's.
He's he's he's also pure.
And that's the other thing that you like about him.
He's he's actually a presexual character and he's pure and he's not he's not in any way diminished.
And he really believes in justice.
And there's something that's really people like about like that.
Yeah.
And it reflects in the relationship with Nancy Allen, which is not sexualized.
Right.
But when she sees him spin the gun and I I'll still get I'll still get choked up about that because like that's such a good fucking.
Oh, yeah, that relationship with Nancy Allen.
Yeah, it's worth noting it's for anything to hold up that was made in 1987.
I say this very cynically as a person is just like, look, come on.
Revenge of the Nerds is amazing.
It's a tragedy that culture moves so fast that some of these movies that are so influential and great.
They just end up having so many cultural problem points because this is how people, you know, it's like, like, oh, if you had telekinesis back then, you popped a girl's bra off and like it would have been.
It's weird science.
You were it's it Robocop does not have you it doesn't it doesn't it doesn't it doesn't throb with the problematizable.
No, no, it's because by the way, I was an executive on weird science when it was in script form.
And I thought it was I just watched that recent land boy that doesn't really hold up.
But I think the reason that is because I grew up in Marin County, which is a very, very neoliberal place.
And it was very granola in the days that I grew up there.
And my mother was the title nine officer at Redwood High School, and she was part of an sort of a feminist movement there.
And so I was sort of steeped in that my mother had, you know, one night Gloria Steinem showed up at the house and when I was 13.
So I think all of that had an effect on me in a way that I really did want to create a role with Lewis that was just a role for a cop.
Yeah, wasn't about anything else.
I love that. And sometimes it's as easy as what you don't do. It restraint.
So in casting, we couldn't cast it and we we had all this problem casting it and we kept looking at and very often really understood this too at some level.
And again, if you look at his movies, you can see why.
But we kept looking at women and they would come into all these beautiful women came in and whenever you imagine them with him, it became this kind of thing.
She's going to rub her hands on the chassis of his chest.
Yeah, he sexualizes it somehow. And so one day, one day, Paul said, Yeah, I keep seeing the poster of Annie.
I think she should look like the girl from Annie. And then Nancy Allen walked in.
So there's this kind of like trove.
She's sunny, she's feminine, but she's not sexual and she's kind of tough.
She has a legacy as a victim in movies. She's a scream queen.
Yeah, she really likes this movie because it's not it's not that.
That's what she's reborn in this movie as and there's it's also so immediately notable.
I thought this was just brilliant futurism in your movie that in the locker room scenes, they're coed.
And as a 15 year old in 1987, it made perfect sense.
It was such a it cost no money.
No production value put into it.
There it is. We're in the future.
Why the men and the women?
Yeah, of course, eventually we're going to stop.
10 years later, we did the shower scene in Starship the same for the same reason.
Yeah, was it when you got the budget, was it more than you dreamed of or way less than you hoped for?
For Robocup?
Yeah.
Well, the movie almost didn't get made a couple of times.
It was it was supposed to be seven six because that's what Terminator had cost.
And they were going to spend a dollar more.
And then one day we came into the office and everybody's gone home and it was over.
And then they turned around and they decided they found some more money because they found some money in Japan
because Peter Weller had done Bakaru Banzai and they were interested in Peter.
And so suddenly we were on again.
And we went in at like $10 million or something.
And then we immediately had trouble and we were the final cost of the movies was 13.9, which is actually an amazing budget for that.
It would be about 28.
Like normally like Blue Thunder was a movie that was made during that time as an action picture.
And that was 28 at the time.
So John Davidson.
Blue Thunder was $28 million. That's so sad.
It's super power was not making noise.
It was a super helicopter.
If it wanted it, you could turn the volume down on it.
That's right.
But boy did it play with Roy Scheider's alcoholism.
But I like my uncle wrote that.
The but and it made what 50 million.
Which Robocup?
It was made $54 million, which in those days was a hit.
Yeah.
Sleeper hit of the summer.
So then you're a made man.
I kind of want to talk about the two jakes of Robocup.
Robocup 2 would be only because historically it's so interesting.
I was reading the Wikipedia and I was like, Oh God, what a forest gumpy kind of thing that Robocup 2 is interesting sequel.
You definitely even if you don't read a single credit, you're kind of like, what's going on here?
And, you know, they went to Frank Miller to write the script because it was 1988 and the WGA strike.
WGA strike.
And you had a script in the chamber.
Right.
You got another new Meyer coming out.
Oh, you did?
You'd written one?
Well, okay.
So they when the movie came out and we were made as you said, they said, okay, you have to write a new Robocup immediately or you're fired.
They literally said, if you don't immediately write a new story, we can fire you.
And so we said, okay.
And then Oliver Stone wanted us to write a script.
And so four called about the CIA in Nicaragua.
And that was kind of sexy, you know, and they sent us down to Nicaragua.
You get to work with Jim Belushi.
We got to run around with Sandinistas.
It was really, it was really groovy and he had just done platoon.
So he was the man.
So we wrote two scripts at the same time, which is a mistake.
And we did it in three months and one script turned out better than the other and the Robocup script that we had written right before the strike.
It was okay.
You wrote Salvador?
No, we wrote a thing called Company Man right after platoon.
And it was about it was about Nicaragua, not where was it?
Where is Salvador?
It's probably Salvador.
Yeah.
This was about the Sandinistas and we had to go down and do all that.
It was kind of a fun script, but they, Oliver didn't make it.
And then we got fired because there was a writer strike and they hire, they signed a waiver and hired Frank Miller, who I had introduced to John Davis.
This is a really cool guy.
I don't really know him.
And so Frank did that script.
He did a, he did one script, which they, they rejected.
And then they brought in Waylon Green, who wrote the Wild Bunch and they did a second script.
Wow.
And it was kind of based on the creature.
In some ways, I believe it was based on the creature that Phil Tippett was going to do for it because John and Phil really had this idea.
And there's, I don't love the movie, but there's the drug dealer kid is something I feel I could redeem if I had been writing it.
Yeah.
Well, okay.
That was a roller coaster sentence because I was like, I, you know, one thing I fucking hate about that movie is that obnoxious ventriloquist, dummy kid.
No, I know.
But there's something.
But you're absolutely right.
Yes.
The things you could have done.
Yeah.
I don't remember anything about Robocop 2 because I hated it and I just, I did nothing sticks to my brain.
The thing that sticks to my brain that I, it reminds me of something that you could have done a lot with.
I thought it was a great, wonderful idea that the tragedy of the Robocop story and Robocop 2 is that the prime directives go up for committee.
Right.
And he ends up with like 109 directives.
Like, would it, it won't kill you to smile now and then.
And kind of like, it's just sort of like Robocop becomes this schizophrenic.
I don't know if it's true, but I bet you that's a John Davison idea.
Because that's really what John, that would have been.
Directive number four was don't sweat the little shit.
Right. I mean, I just, I find that kind of, it's funny and it's absurd and realistic.
Like, it's just like the, it's resonant.
The idea of like, oh God, this would be the thing that would kill Robocop.
He would end up having like all these directives and then like, but yeah, that, that, that, but it's, if it wasn't called Robocop, it might even be like a cult favorite of mine.
Because it would be like this weird comic booky cyber punky movie with Tom Noonan as this crackhead that turns into a crackhead robot.
But as a Robocop sequel, boy, how could you, how could you.
It's got to make you feel kind of, kind of good that, you know, nobody can make it work.
Because there's been so many different like.
When you drop swords, they just merge with stones.
They just, they can make a Robocop remake of TV series.
Well, I hope they'll get it right one of these days.
Yeah.
MGM wants to make another one and we're trying to help, but we'll see.
Yeah. So there is a, there was a, there was this reboot in 2014, which I didn't watch.
And I'm not usually a snob about reboots, but this is too personal for me.
I knew there was absolutely no way.
I saw the, I saw the suit and I, I got mad.
What the fuck?
I'm like, maybe.
I mean, give me a break.
Again, I was like, I saw the.
Rob, that personally just wounded.
I'm just so pissed off.
I mean, it's just, cause it's just like somebody went, no, I think we can do better.
And that's, that's what they come up with.
And it's like, get the, get, get seriously, get out, get out of here.
The arrogance is astounding.
Out of here.
Especially when even for your time, it was already, it was already a, a, a confident bet.
It wasn't, it wasn't like all the rage was guys in ridiculous tin man costumes, like
that looked like tanks.
It wasn't like, oh, you just rode that, those coattails.
It was like, it would already been established that if you just trust this like singular
tone and let it be its own thing and then for them to go like, yeah, but everything's black
and rubber now.
It's hot, but I don't want to bag on that stuff and shake my cane at it.
But they're, it's important to note, so you got Robocop, you got Robocop two, you got
Robocop three, where I think there's like ninjas in that one and a jet pack.
There's been a cartoon.
There's been a, all kinds of stuff.
Comic books.
And then the, there's the reboot, which I didn't watch.
So I don't know what it was.
It was a Canadian TV series.
Canonically.
Prime directive.
Now they're, I don't know what stage they're at.
They can fill us in on the details, but they're, they, they're going to do a sequel to the
original that ignores all of this other stuff.
Is that, that's what I, well, we'll see what's going to happen.
And we'll see.
And, but I have to say that MGM has been very, very nice to me since the reboot.
I, when I got credited because of the WGA, I had to go in and meet with them.
And I met with the, the president of MGM.
And you'll see online, as I was confused, it's like, like Ed's got a credit on the 2014
Robocop reboot, which micro broke a little part of my heart for a second.
Well, it was, I had nothing to do with it.
Right.
It was sort of nice to get the residuals.
And it's because just to clarify, it's, it's because the writers in, in basing it on your
kind of your, your, your characters and your story, they evoked enough of it, that arbitration.
They took so many pieces of it and used it that in the arbitration process, they, they
assigned us a fair amount of credit for it.
Now I feel like that's got to feel good because that's not even like the, the, like it's,
it's a, it's a, it's a maybe like a 15 year old boy fantasy to be like, yeah.
And then, and then they did it without me and it sucked.
And it's like, it's, but like that's a, that's a proper like mentor wizard fantasy of like,
it's been 30 years and these kids are trying your craft and like the blood magic gets out
of control and you're just like, yeah, you're, you're, you're sitting there and you're lazy
boy and you're like, oh, I felt a tingle.
Someone's trying to do what I did again.
They always, they always think they, they, they're always sure that what they're doing
is the right thing.
Do you feel like maybe you can, or can't talk about what stage this new possible straight
sequel thing is, but do you feel confident if you went back and tried to do the sequel
that you have, like, that you, like, you know where you're going with that and you could
pull it off?
We've had, we've had a bunch of conversation about this.
I was going to, what happened, which was interesting was I went in when they were,
when I, when I met them, they'd all just finished this movie, hadn't come out yet.
And I had a kind of, it was kind of a weird, like, how did I feel about this?
They were remaking this movie.
I was meeting all these people, but I remembered having made a couple of movies that were traumatic,
like that they were all probably in shock and that had been a very difficult experience.
And it really had been.
And so I decided to just interview them about that.
And I interviewed everyone I could.
I interviewed the writer that we got credit from.
I interviewed the president.
I interviewed the director.
And I would just sit there and say, well, what was that like?
And how did that happen?
And they sort of remembered that somehow.
And when the movie came out, it didn't do that well.
I got a call from the president of production saying, why don't you come in here and tell
us any Robocop ideas you have?
And I went in and I said, well, you know, there was, I started telling him this idea I had.
And he said, are you pitching me the original sequel that you guys wrote back in 1988?
And I said, well, yeah, kind of.
And he said, oh, okay.
And that sort of has set us off in a different direction.
Oh, fuck yeah.
Baby.
Are you kidding me?
No, but we'll see.
There's a lot of work to be done.
And then Neil Blumkamp came swooping in when he heard they were going to do it.
And look at Rob.
He was going to do it for a while.
He said, well, there's one funny story about it.
Then it didn't work out.
They developed a few scripts and he had a bunch of different ideas.
And I don't think it ever really came together.
But at one point he decided, and I thought this was interesting.
He said, we really got to go and do it like it happened right after the first one.
That it was Verhoeven's next movie.
He said, I'm going to do it just like Paul Verhoeven.
So the other day I'm sitting with Paul Verhoeven.
He said, yeah, he said he was going to do it just like Paul Verhoeven.
I can't quite do Paul's voice.
It sounds better.
And he said, but he said, I can't do it like Paul Verhoeven.
He said, because I won't have the same set of circumstances creatively.
I'm not trying to make a movie for $10 million.
I don't have John Davidson.
I don't have Phil Tippett then.
I don't have you.
I don't have all these people together.
And for him, that's as much a part of the creative thing in that moment as anything else.
Yeah, because that movie does kind of feel like...
And Die Hard 2, that's more of a kind of a larger production, maybe.
But they feel like B-movies that were done perfectly.
And they kind of feel like they were made in secrets.
They were made for you.
When you walk into the theater, we turned over a rock and found a diamond.
It's not like you go in there and there's this giant tent pole kind of thing.
Well, they're not shoving it down your throat as we were talking.
Yeah, exactly.
It's like the Robocop.
I feel a personal relationship with that in a way that I don't feel with like E.T.
or things like that that are just these giant juggernaut kind of things.
I think that might have something to do with just not to sound like an old cane shaker,
but I think it just has to do with the singularity that hasn't happened yet, which is CG.
When CG starts to happen, the vastness of your world is not related in any way to your budget.
If Kronenberg wants to reboot the fly, he has to rent a warehouse.
He has to build telepods.
And these characters, these Rick Bakers, these Phil Tippets, these craftsmen have to come in
and figure out how to make a beetle into a person and vice versa.
And there's a relationship there between budget, scope, but more importantly, like,
oh, if this guy is going to become a fly in this movie, then it's all the more important
that we understand that he's a human being because of the budget,
because of the practicality of the makeup and everything.
We can't waste anyone's time here on an emotional level.
And then you start to get into like, okay, you're going to show up at Warner Brothers.
There's going to be a 90-foot sheet of green.
You're not going to be in a scene with any other actor.
We just need your head.
We're going to scan it from 360 degrees.
Sign this form that says, if you die, you can be a cracker.
And congratulations because the computer says you already made $100 million in Hong Kong
and go, goodbye.
And we've made some amazing movies with this technology,
but what we've also done is we've lost that middle class.
I don't know what to call it.
Well, Verhoeven always would say that reality is the best special effect
and that reality is what makes these things work.
And even in a story level, he would go, I don't like that.
It's not real.
It's not how it would happen.
Even if you're talking about absurd things like robots and law enforcement and stuff like that.
And also, you really feel the reality of a man in a suit.
The performance is because of that suit.
Oh, let's talk about that a little bit.
Sure.
Dr. Weller, PhD.
So I always assumed, and I think this is incredibly easy to assume,
and I'm so intrigued that the answer is not exactly,
that when you watch Robocop, because I didn't, it's like, who was Peter Weller?
It turns out, Bucca Rubanzi, right, okay.
But I watched that movie and I was like, who's this guy?
Oh, they must have cast him for those like weird kissy lips.
His like almost feminine jawline.
Because they knew that they were committing this cardinal sin,
that they were going to be casting this actor with no,
this character was going to have no eyes, no nose, no ears.
And it was so important.
It was a picture like these auditions where these actors are coming in and standing under a sheet
that's on C stands and the only thing visible is their lips and that Peter Weller walked away with the part.
Not the case at all.
He was Bucca Rubanzi.
Well, it really helps that Peter was really thin.
That helps a lot when you're building a suit like that.
And so if you put the wrong person in the suit, you're going to get the Michelin man.
But he's very, he also has this kind of perfect look of,
I used to say when I was being meaner,
but he has this kind of tragic look, mythic self pity or something.
But there's a tragedy about his face that really works well in that.
But no, he's got those kissy lips.
We had, we always, I always thought you needed a real actor in the park.
We had, we went out to a bunch of different people came in.
I mean, Keith Carradine wanted to do it.
Robert Carradine, no, not David Carradine really wanted to do it.
And so we had all those kinds of things, but it came down to, I think...
There's a great SNL sketch here, obviously.
Jack Lemon and the Robocop.
Peter was somebody that was, we knew he was a good actor.
He had, Orion liked him because he had, Bucca Rubanzi had made some money in Japan.
And he came in, he wouldn't read on tape.
So he read with me.
He says he didn't read, but we actually had to read with me.
And it was actually kind of scary.
And Paul and I, well, Paul said, okay, that's good.
We'll go with him.
And then he went out and trained with a mime coach, Monee Yacum,
for a long time in hockey gear, in Central Park, trying to get all these moves.
That's so cool.
It's so important that his movements are so...
Did anybody ask him to do that?
And of course, now you will start acting like a man.
I think he wanted to do that.
He knew that was an issue.
John Davidson, everybody knew that was a good idea.
So meantime, the suit...
Well, the suit is being made and it's being made.
And then the suit is a week late in production,
which really causes a lot of trouble, but it's for good reasons.
Come quietly or there will be trouble.
When Peter is thrown into that suit for the first time,
it's a huge crisis in the production because he's never been in the suit before.
And even though there's been all this prep and all this stuff,
now you've got to make the character work.
And it was a really bad weekend.
And it was sort of a cauldron.
And out of that bad, bad weekend came this suit movements.
All the stuff he'd done before, now he's working with Paul.
And that's how...
It was like it was born under huge pressure.
Wait, well, I want to make sure I'm clear on what you're saying.
You're saying there was this sort of travesty.
It almost sounds like the Jaws story of the Sharks Network.
No, there wasn't anything wrong with the suit.
The minute the last minute, it was more complicated than everybody.
And was his work with the Mime people as a result of the awkwardness of the suit being late?
He had never really been in the suit before.
And then the suit came on to the set later than it was supposed to.
So there was a lot of pressure, like let's suit it tomorrow.
And in those days, when you had a suit,
the first time you put it on, it took 14 hours.
So the first day he shot maybe an hour.
14 hours?
And then by the time they got it right, it was a much quicker in and of.
But it was a big deal.
But it was somehow, everybody at the time, we had other problems.
We almost got shut down.
The production guarantee came in.
And for a moment, it looked really bad.
And it was under this kind of pressurized situation at the beginning of the movie
that the suit came in and he had to get in it.
And it was where the character was born.
This is something that can't be discounted because at the time, although there's no CG,
it is something that absolutely makes all of what you're doing on this set so potentially disastrous.
It didn't work.
It wasn't going to work.
That was the entire moment right there.
Everything else was working.
But if that didn't come together, if Peter, if you didn't buy Peter in the suit as Rebel Cop,
then that was anybody that knows their 1980s popcorn movie,
you mentioned a movie from 1986 that you were so when you saw it.
Short circuit.
Yeah.
I was like, oh, God, I never thought about short circuit in relation to Rebel Cop.
And it was your nightmare because it was like, that's how you do it.
They were going to beat us into the theaters.
It was like, that's what a robot was in that day.
No CG yet, but absolutely armatures, erectors.
I am a remote control.
E.T. is a robot, essentially.
And I was really relieved.
I was like, oh, thank God.
This is so different from that.
The stupid question, the gun holster that comes out of his leg,
was that a practical effect or is that stop motion?
That was a practical effect that it was a leg that Robertine made.
And Robertine, here's how good Robertine is.
Robertine just made that.
What?
We didn't talk to him about it.
He just said, oh, no, it has to be this way.
And he just made that.
He just myth-bustered it and said, fuck it,
the thing comes out and I'm thinking of the gun.
Of the many, many, many.
I kind of want to talk about Foley.
I want to talk about the loop group because it's like, I wonder,
is it a loop group line where it's like in that firing squad thing where,
okay, so everyone's just shooting on the firing line
and then slowly the sound of this weird gun.
And then everyone's running.
Verhoeven's doing this thing.
The camera's going.
Everyone's running.
And then there's this one voice rings out.
There's this guy going, look at that fucking gun.
I meant to bring it to you.
I'll bring you the script.
It's in the script.
It's in the script?
I love it.
The cop's reaction to Robocop is so important
because, again, they do say while they're running
and they're separated by Chainlink,
they're watching this robot who, by the way,
is being meticulously revealed.
That was Verhoeven.
Verhoeven, I remember from the commentary,
the brilliant idea of the first time you see him
is essentially on video assist.
He walks by.
And it's so smart because it goes
and it's subjective.
The transformation where you go into death itself
and then the only thing you're conscious of
is the reassembly of your life.
You, the audience, including a weird female executive
in a pencil skirt who is not a character in the film
but is a character in your formative life
who made out with you drunk at a New Year's Eve party.
But that's the...
You mean Tyler.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, I'm saying, like, she's not in the movie.
She doesn't have an arc.
No, she is.
She is actually the...
Well, she didn't have an arc.
I know I'm saying, like, she has a story
only within Robocop's nursery.
It's so ancient Greek.
It's like, we don't have to carry her.
We didn't have to figure out how she's related to this and that
ever when Dick Jones gets fired goes,
like, can I be promoted?
It's like, she is simply...
Her job, mythically, is that she is this Athena
that is there.
The addition of this idea that during this assembly
of what you're becoming Robocop,
and so you don't know how much time is passing,
and then...
And, like, the targeting systems are like,
all right, no, hold it.
Ah, shit!
And you're watching them.
And then...
And it comes to life and you hear in the distance
music, party favors,
and this drunk version of this woman
who has smugly crushed Miguel Ferrer's hand
with the prosthesis and, like,
she just comes into the...
She sneaks over to the camera
and puts a big lipstick kiss on it.
Sage Parker.
And that's an interesting scene
because that's the only ad-lib scene in the whole movie.
We were at the Mary Cape cosmetics company in Dallas,
which is where that shot.
And somebody, the prop person,
brought in a box of props for a New Year's Eve
party or something.
I don't know why they were there, and I said,
oh, we have to use this crown,
and we have to do this New Year's Eve party.
And I wrote it.
The only time I've ever done this,
I went into a room in Mary Cape Place,
and I wrote this thing, and they shot it.
And that was the scene.
And that was really...
The kiss was something that was sort of ad-libbed on the set.
And so the cops, then, like, yeah,
I went off on several tangents there,
but the cops, even though, like,
the story is just mounting, and it's like,
we're just not seeing all of Robocop yet.
And now we're seeing enough of him
through the eyes of the cops.
And the cops are both one.
They can't get enough of seeing him.
They just want to see him.
But at the same time, they're absolutely aware,
and one of them says something like,
they're going to replace him.
We're out of a job.
It's like...
You feel like if you're developing a movie
that somebody would have the note of, like,
do the cops like Robocop or not?
It's just saying, I'm confused,
because you got them running,
and it seems like they're big fans of Robocop.
But don't they want cops to be not Robocops?
We were really...
John Davison really kept some of those things away.
I mean, you know, we had to deal with some notes,
but we didn't have to deal with too many of them,
and they kind of really let us, you know,
bring them the script.
And I guess each time we brought them one,
there was never...
We never had those notes,
or I don't remember any of those.
I also remember not taking too many of their notes,
or just I learned that you could ignore the bad ones.
Yeah, I mean, they'll call you difficult,
but if you make $50 million,
who's gonna remember that?
So what did you prefer?
Because it seems like when you look at your filmography,
you seem more invested in the Starship Trooper franchise.
That seems like something that kind of...
No, I mean, they offered me...
I kept getting paid to write the Starship Trooper stuff.
And John Davison wanted to do...
John Davison always wanted to help
Phil Tippett direct a movie,
so that was Starship 2,
and I came along to help him a little bit.
Are the bugs the good guys?
Not really.
I felt like the movie was saying,
ha, ha.
The movie says maybe you have been rooting for the Nazis
in the act in actually...
Which is not something that when you say,
you talk about referencing these movies,
that's not an element of the movies
that you're referencing.
Military movies that are selling warbots.
Well, what do you mean?
The moral ambiguity of the,
well, you never know what makes us so different from the Nazis.
I think that's not an element of those movies.
Of which movies?
Of the American propaganda movies,
but we also looked at all the movies they were making, too.
I mean, we were just trying to come...
The Nazi propaganda.
Would you like to know more?
Well, there you go.
Yeah, those sequences are amazing.
The narrative pieces.
Did you kind of meticulously write those?
Are you...
Those are my favorite things.
Those are the things that I like.
I can imagine you agonizing over page by page,
where it's like...
Have you ever had a moment when you're doing work
that turned out to be great?
Spoilers, I need the answer to be yes.
Where it's like,
you're not allowed to tell anybody
what you've done in the last six hours
because the actual technical answer
is dialogue.
Well, that's my entire writing life.
All right, thank you. God damn.
It takes me forever.
To answer your question a long time,
there were five drafts of Robocop.
If somebody gives me an email,
I'll send you the production draft.
I'll send you mine.
LAUGHTER
We should plug, by the way,
your Creepshow series is coming out.
Creepshow.
Yeah.
It starts Thursday
on Shutter
and a first episode
directed by Greg Nicotero.
It's based off of
the Stephen King story, Grey Matter.
And second one is directed
by George Harrison, who worked
on the original Creepshow.
And
there's two
installments for episode.
I'm in the second episode.
So not this week, Thursday,
but the following Thursday
is my episode.
And I think we have a
special guest, Ed.
I didn't know that they were going to
show up, but...
Ed Neumeyer.
LAUGHTER
You have ten seconds
to comply with my interview
questions.
Oh my gosh, this is...
Oh my gosh, it's the Ed2O9
Access Hollywood segment.
Do-do-do-do-do-do.
This little picture-in-picture
swooping by of Ed2O9 interviewing
Tom Cruise and Mickey Rourke.
So did you two get along on set?
Uh...
I will ask the questions.
Oh, sorry.
Ed Neumeyer.
LAUGHTER
What is your purpose on this premises?
Sorry, I'm not really teeing you up.
LAUGHTER
I'm trying to figure out more
what would Ed2O9 ask.
And it's not really setting you up
for success as a performer.
LAUGHTER
That's one of my pet peeves.
People ask a funny question,
and then you're supposed to go,
yes?
LAUGHTER
I don't like it.
Hey, guys,
I'm in the production booth.
Throw to commercials.
Right. We'll be right back.
Okay. Hey, Ed.
What's going on over there?
LAUGHTER
Come on.
I have been made extremely nervous
by interviewing my own creator.
Okay, well...
I understand that,
but you have the three-by-five cards in front of you.
Just read the questions that we went over
before he came in.
So now we're in Blade Runner.
LAUGHTER
We'll be right back.
Yes.
LAUGHTER
Ed.
Newmeyer.
LAUGHTER
What are stairs like?
Okay, yeah, that was the thing.
They built the perfect robot.
Motherfucker can't get upstairs.
But that was absolutely brilliant.
That, to me, seems a little bit like
Robert Zemeckis talked about
the use of not being able to
write past the point and back to the future
where he's got to either make out with his mom
in a car or the movie's over.
LAUGHTER
And that there was, like, just years of
boy, to the extent that the story
tells itself,
we are in a box here.
LAUGHTER
America doesn't love incest yet.
Pornhub hasn't come out.
LAUGHTER
And then they just came up with the
best thing, which was
she kisses him and she says
it's like kissing my brother.
You talk about the roar line of Murphy
and it's just like, unproductive.
And I think what they're saying is
thank you for getting us out of that
Hellraiser incest box.
That's how I imagine the staircase.
Good interview again.
I never thought the staircase gag was going to be
as funny as it was.
I thought I hoped it was good enough
and then Phil Tippett made it work.
It all starts to get worse because
it really doesn't occur to you.
Robocop goes to the skyscraper,
he walks to the CEO
of this thing, goes you're under arrest
and the guy goes ha ha ha, capitalism,
power, I've got the big guns, I've got
the money, I've got everything.
I believe you know Ed 209, Ed 209's got
rockets, got gatling guns
and Robocop can only get away
from him by going
downstairs.
And then you have this comical
ad moment of Ed 209, like a little
chicken on its back
on the stairs. I love the fact that
Ed 209 knows he can't do stairs
that he does a little tiptoe.
He's like
He's like a dog
trying to go in the pool.
The thing that Phil did that was interesting is
he always thought Phil was a baby, he was a prototype.
So he always made him
like a young idea.
You sort of like him a little bit
because he's trying so hard.
He just thought, yeah.
To the design phase, we got to
make him stair capable.
Right?
It's really true.
The hubris.
He's for urban
pacification.
I love that.
Who cares if it didn't work?
Well, realizing that
something as simple as stairs
that we don't associate with humanization
can actually
make the difference between us and the system.
What's the doctor who guys that can't get up the stairs?
Daleks.
Daleks can't get up the stairs.
But also just the rock people, there's the big old
rock fuckers.
You're something that's really important to me.
The return threshold
which I'm always at.
This is a really complicated thing to talk
to people about.
What is this fucking return threshold?
You get your ass kicked
and it's like, I think by far
is the most often that I
reference this particular thing in Robocop
which, however, it seems to have
so much to do with location
scouting, choreography.
It's the fact that Robocop
after fleeing at 209
and he goes out front and now
the floodlights come on him
and his own brother policemen
have been assigned to kill him.
They open fire on him.
He retreats into the parking garage
just a way, but it's like
I don't know if Piric Victory is the right description
of it, but he
he's in a parking
garage laying down and he simply
rolls
like
the other day I'm having lunch with Paul Verhoeven
and I said, so how do you work with
Yandaban versus how do you work with Yosef
Khanna? These are the two cinematographers
that he worked with. Yandaban, by the way, showed
that I heard.
He told me this one was this way
and this one was that way and he said
Yost always had really good ideas
and I remember this and he told me this
I remember Yosef going, oh wait, over here
see where all these ramps are going? He can get away
that way. And no human could?
I don't know, it just worked out.
It's things that works in movies. I mean he's surrounded with Kevlar.
It's his blessing in his curse.
Paul just said
it was so lovely he had that idea because
it got us out of this problem.
Just think that there's
no way, sometimes in my worst moments
I'm rehearsing myself because I'm like
I imagine you writing that somehow.
I didn't write that.
In the script, how did he get out of there?
I think there was a cut and then a new scene
and he was running away and there was nobody around.
Something like that.
You did like a newspaper
and Robocampus came out.
It was heroin.
He had to be saved by Lewis.
Extreme, extreme.
Robot man gets away.
Must have cost him a fortune.
And says,
Murphy is me, Lewis.
We knew that.
In fact, I once pitched that to Stan Lee.
Stan Lee liked that so much.
He said, oh wait, here's the really good part
where he comes and finds his character.
What you don't know is that
this almost was a Marvel comic book.
And thank God it wasn't because they were going to buy it.
Stan Lee wanted to buy it
at a certain point for a comic book.
Then he asked me if it was
hadn't I just read Deathlock
and they don't know it anyway.
And then they decided, because Marvel wasn't a very successful company,
then they decided not to do it.
And it went to Orion.
Thank God for Stan Lee's lack of success.
Well, he did okay after that.
That's so funny.
I love the baller and I'm going to be a cynic
and say, I bet Stan Lee
as a Hail Mary in every meeting
back then would say,
never having even seen Deathlock,
that he would just go,
are you sure this isn't just Deathlock?
Because 10% of the time a writer
would cave and go, yeah, it is.
I didn't realize how dangerous it was
to talk to people like that at the time.
Because they had all these characters,
but I think Marvel was more a bun.
There was a secretary
and one other guy in Stan Lee out here
and that was it.
I met him when I was a young executive universal
and he had nothing better to do
than go out to have lunch with me.
Who at the
Fortune Cookie Place writes
I don't know,
but it was right on Robertson.
It was right there.
Fortune Cookies were badass though.
Did you save that Fortune Cookie?
I don't know.
I might be somewhere in a box.
They became advice cookies.
They became like, you know, sometimes wearing a tie
can make you feel more confident.
Did someone start suing Fortune Cookies?
Because they used to say like,
a dude's going to murder you with something red.
They were fun.
Duck.
That was the menu, you dummy.
Biggest cookie I ever saw.
Couldn't even eat it.
I get drunk for how to show it.
I'm never going to get over
that one of the prime directors was from a Fortune Cookie.
That's just like the universe
just helping you make a movie.
I think there's something worth noting,
which is your legacy.
One of your kids
is this really interesting
and the description of their work
is so
thoroughly modern.
Shane is a disability rights activist.
They're a lawyer.
Disability activist,
but also a whole
transgender activist.
It's as if you had a child
that became
a trans
it's a trans thing, isn't it?
It's a trans human idea
in a weird way.
There is something about that.
Something future future.
I imagine that must make you
proud.
I don't want to assume
me.
I'm frightened of
what they do these days.
No, I'm kidding.
They just won a big settlement
against a place that
uses electric shock on kids.
Are they an autistic activist as well?
Yeah.
And also about
how the mentally ill
are treated.
It's not a pretty picture, of course.
But Shane does
all that kind of stuff.
And I do feel like Shane
in what they're doing
is saying, I don't want to be
a human like other humans are.
I am not a human like other humans are.
But what I am
is they are autistic.
They have facial anomalies.
They don't look like other people.
And that is an interesting experience that way
to be so different
in the world. I think sometimes
it's extremely difficult for them.
But also it gives them a certain kind of
power and audacity.
One of my favorite things
that happens occasionally, Shane will call me up
and say, well, I went to the airport the other day
and they talked to me like I was mentally retarded.
And I always
kind of laugh when that happens.
Because I know what's coming next.
Shane will tell them that they're a lawyer
and watch out.
What is their relationship with your work?
You've got this kid
and you're going through
decades of a screenwriting career
and you're
celebrated. You're on red carpets.
There's VHS boxes
lying at the grocery store.
I don't know how the ages work out.
How old Shane was and how old Casey was.
Shane was born the year the movie came out
and my son was born
two years later.
They grew up with that in the shadow of that.
I often think
that it's almost
hard to see.
It's just like everywhere around.
And
I think it was later
that they would both in different ways experience something about it.
I noticed that both of them don't talk about it much.
Occasionally they'll pull it out
if it's the right thing to pull out.
Which I'm really happy that they can get anything out of it at all.
But mostly it's just like
I think they had to put up with all the other parts of me.
Is it weird for you
when you hear
Dan and Rob and I
probably half the people you've met
since 1987
talk about the stuff that you've made
and kind of
when they talk about what it meant to them
or what their reaction to it is
do you ever just feel like
they're
you're hearing them say things
about the movie that you didn't intend
but like
I actually don't think it has that much to
all of that is it's a wonderful thing that happens
and I kind of like it
but it doesn't have anything to do with me.
It's not me, it's the movie
and the fact that people like it
and are in any way inspired by it
is sort of amazing to me
and it wasn't something I thought
could ever happen.
I've heard people say well the reason I went
to film school sitting literally
where I was sitting at UCLA is because of this movie
and that's weird.
Sometimes I think well I hope that was weird.
When it was done
when the script was done went into production
and they're making the film and you got through the suit
problems and all the stuff and you were going into
editing how confident were you
that this was going to be a success or a failure
or was it totally up like it?
I remember the first time we saw the first cut of it
it was really and I had never seen a first cut
of anything before and I remember the
director and I walked out like
what is that and the sound
was all wrong and everything was wrong and when
he walked it sound like he was walking on toilet
plungers it was just terrible.
Big shake like that.
It was like that and then
all the stuff it was great
learning process for me and then all the sound came in
and Steve Flick who did all those
sounds and did the roar and put the
lion's roar.
The footsteps. Could you talk about the footsteps
or what kind of footsteps?
That's because Steve Flick is a genius
and Steve Flick did
Pulp Fiction and he did Starship and he was
just the genius sound guy.
Did he ever say like oh that's a hot dog
vendor?
You know Steve was the first guy who was saying
well there's 100 tracks
and you know
so try to figure out what that is.
Sometimes you get those fun things though
like the exorcist with the cage
of bees or someone else.
There's a lion roar and an ape roar
in that thing that you're doing with
Ed 209. That's really a lion
and an ape and something else.
I honestly just thought that was the MGM lion.
No it was an MGM until later.
That's a good idea we should put that in.
I'll tell them.
But anyway to answer your question
it was like
I didn't know if it would work. I remember
hoping it would work.
And then I saw it and I thought
I had to see it in front of an audience for the first time
and people laughed right away and I thought
oh that's good. And then the second screening
they laughed in all the same places.
One of the things that happened in the first screening was
when Murphy gets killed
in the first version it was much bloodier
and there were these shots of the floor
that were covered with blood.
Every time that happened
women would get up and leave the room
and when we cut the floor out
and we cut shots to a blood out
it
then only one person got it.
I was tired. It's a traumatic thing
and I guess that's a tight rub
because it's your point of immersion
but I guess if you're overdoing it
and it feels pornographic then the women are going to go
you know it seems like you're having fun with this
as opposed to it seems like maybe you
understand.
Now it occurs to me that there's a lot of stuffing
coming out of
it's almost like it's a horrible violent killing
of a teddy bear.
Well if you look at it it's also a crucifixion
he plays it that way for a second.
Well he gets his hands shot off. It's so awful.
There's even a moment where he's like
like that and that was one of the things
so to ask you to answer a question
earlier Verhoeven coming into it
Verhoeven reads the second draft
and reads the title page Robocop
The Future of Law Enforcement and he goes
I'm never going to do this and he doesn't read the script
and so
Barbara Boyle at Orion Pictures
sent it to him and said why don't you read it
maybe you could read it again
for the subtext so he gave it to his wife
Martine
and she read it and she said you know
I think you should read this I think there's going to be
something in it that you like
and he got to the scene with the hand being blown off
and he says he said
let's go we're going to go to America we're going to go do this
so he really said he'd never seen anything like that
he liked that he responded well to that
can you say there was a lot of like
Jesus metaphors
in there like he's walking on the water
we always knew we were playing around
with Jesus and Frankenstein
depending on which
and he's very interested in Jesus
he actually was a Jesus scholar
for 25 years and he really wanted to do
the story of Jesus but when we were in Pittsburgh
and we were in that
that steel plant
and he took me over
to that tank and he said that with these big
walls and he said that's one of the most beautiful
things I've ever seen and it's like
the walls of an ancient city and
I said well that's great we got to use that
and so that became the walking on the water
scene came out of that did Martine and he
break up before showgirls
no okay sorry
no no no
they're still happily married
together all these many years later
alright why
did you like showgirls
well you know
showgirls was the movie he was doing
when
we were trying to get him to do it
when I wanted him to do structure
talking about the things that make you feel good
well there's that guy, there's my partner
there's the other piston of this engine
but minus me
yeah there was a moment where Paul was going to be
no Paul had already done two movies in a row
that Paul was the biggest director
in Hollywood for a moment and a half there
because he'd done total recall
he's amazing
he clearly is
and then he did showgirls
there was almost a moment where I thought
he won't do this movie because he can do anything
and so when showgirls
crashed and burned a little it was kind of good for me
and actually
the sort of neat thing about him was
I went over to see him like on a Thursday
the movie was going to come out on a Friday
and he was so full of himself
and he was so like yeah maybe we'll do your movie
I'm not sure
we'll buy Mars or something like that
and then it came out
and it got bad reviews and on
Sunday
he came out to my house in Eagle Rock
and we sat down and we started working on Starship
and later on I asked him how did you recover
from that that was such a drubbing
I mean how do you deal with that because it's hard
to deal with that stuff and he said I just went to work right away
right with you
with me which I take
it's true
are you still friends with him today?
I just had lunch with him on Friday
let's bring him out
I told him I was going to do this
and he's going to listen and now he's never
well I don't know if he'll listen
we're ending the show anyway it doesn't matter
he might hear about it maybe he won't
alright thanks for coming in that's been our time everybody
give it up for Ed Neumeyer everybody
thank you
Rob Trob
everybody here at Donnie's
thanks for coming Jeff Davis your mayor
Dan Harmon
thank you all
let's all go home and watch Robocop again
drive fast and take chances
before you get beat up
did you get any of that?
it's a good show